okay good morning everyone welcome to
the last class we've made it we've
almost made it we have one more class
next Tuesday bright and early 7:30 in
the morning yes uh yesterday on Tuesday
I went through all the expectations for
the final project written report oral
presentations stand up on the right
right side of the screen move to the
left side of the screen we don't need to
go over any of that again I don't think
please review all that material in the
recorded lecture from Tuesday uh
Tuesday's recorded lecture if you're not
clear just again a final reminder we've
got 60 presentations they are all
awesome we're going to try and get
through we will get through all of them
in two hours and 45 minutes as long as
everybody keeps to length limits submits
publicly viewable YouTube videos at the
right place at the right time and so on
so please do your part to make sure
uh we run a well oiled machine Tuesday
morning any questions or anything that
wasn't clear from last time uh in the
report if our plots are too big for
example like you put them in appendix
you can put them in an appendix that's
that's fine if you've got a lot of if
you got a A lot of visual results to
report that's fine let's keep the pros
to about four pages please and thank you
yes the video can just have no audio the
video should have no audio um I will
mute things anyway so if you want to add
a soundtrack knock yourself out but we
will not hear it
yes yes like you said for the second
part of the report you want to like Des
like describe our code want likeo code
like how you want describe uh you you're
describing the functionality how you
implemented things where did you make
changes you can include pseudo code if
you want we just want you to try it
assume we don't remember exactly how you
did things it's probably a pretty good
assumption because there's 60 view so
highlevel view what were you trying to
do so we're about to read the results
right you're a and b and we want we are
going to try and assess whether it was a
fair comparison is the hexapod 10 times
bigger than the quadrip if so probably
the hexapod is going to win in your ab
test so give us enough description to
understand how you attack the problem
how you implement it describe for us
enough detail to see that it is a fair
comparison between A and B that level of
detail if you want to include pseudo
code that's fine use common sense what
we don't want to see is here's a
screenshot of our code doesn't mean
anything to us yep the
presentation the or the oral
presentation no the oral presentation is
not a scroll through of your PDF it is
the opposite right you you want to in
your two minutes and 30 seconds show us
what you did don't tell us what you did
so video uh Fitness plots footprint
graphs fog genetic trees as much V not
as much but focus on the visuals right
this is just true of Vis of verbal
communication and science Communication
in general right you could create a
slide Deck with a whole bunch of bullet
points and read them off right I have
tried to not do that in this class
you've sort of seen how I've tried to
communicate to you a lot of information
visually verbally my the oral
contribution is a complement to what's
on the
screen um when showing how the robot can
evolve um you're recommending like a
blind comparison that we could do
between like the different groups and
like maybe like a control if the control
was not
like if it was like just evolved for
like less like like smaller amount of
time on like not as like specific of
like the conditions of your robot or
like a fitness function would that be
like a fair comparison or does it like
sort of have to be trained in like the
same number of generations to actually
have a that's a good question so it's a
question about what makes for a good
control so you were trying to achieve
something in your final project look I
achieved it how do we know that you
achieved it usually it's the robot is
jumping better it's walking better it's
hitting the ball better better than what
right the what is the control what
counts as a good control for the
purposes of this class A control is a
random controller show us two videos
simultaneously one with your robot being
controlled by a random controller so a
random set of synaptic weights and the
other video same robot same task same
physics engine but it's being contr
controlled by the most fit controller or
the most fit robot body that your
evolutionary algorithm
found and if we can tell without you
telling us that's what makes it a blind
test if we can tell which is the evolved
and which is the random that's pretty
good evidence that your evolutionary
algorithm actually did something it was
able to improve Fitness significantly
above what you would find in the initial
random
population isn't the go have that
difference between the A and okay right
so basically there are two pairs of
videos we really want to see in your in
your presentation right the first pair
is what I just described show us that
your evolutionary algorithm worked
whatever it was whatever that
evolutionary algorithm was did it
improve significantly over random
behavior and random robots the second
pair of videos is here's some robots
from a here's some robots from B and if
the result or the claim you're trying to
defend is a is better than b then the
same thing we should be able to
immediately see that a is jumping better
than b or a is running better than b
whatever it is if that's your claim if
your claim is B did better than a then
obviously we should see the behaviors of
B are better than the behaviors of a it
is also fine in your oral presentation
and your written report to defend the
claim that there is no difference
between a and b The evolutionary
algorithm improved behavior in a and
here's proof that Evolution made
progress here's proof that Evolution
improved things in b as well but there's
no difference between a and b that's
also fine it's the fourth outcome you're
trying to avoid which is here's some
behaviors of a and here's some behaviors
of B and it's really hard to tell
whether one is jumping better than the
other I don't really know whether what I
put into my variant B of my code
actually made it easier for The
evolutionary algorithm to evolve jumping
walking hitting whatever it
is make
sense so pictures the pictures count
for I think you can put it in an
appendix if you want if you've got you
know a couple of figures then that's
fine if it's in the body of the four
page PDF but if you've got you know four
6 8 10 figures that you want to
reference in your document put them in
an appendix and reference it reference
them in the main body of your
report that fine so again we're assuming
that not everyone has the same
high-powered laptop you want to be able
to do enough Evolution so that there's a
difference between random behaviors and
evolved Behavior so it doesn't need to
be a smooth curve the way you would get
a smooth curve is if you did 10
independent Trials of your evolutionary
algorithm you rewind the tape run it
again with a different random population
you get a second Fitness curve rewind
the tape third curve rewind fourth
rewind Fifth and if you average all of
them the more of them you have the
smoother the curve you're going to get
but if your laptop is uh entering its
golden years you might not be able to
get as many so you might have a more
rugged looking or discontinuous Fitness
curve that's okay as long as the end of
the curve wherever it is 10 Generations
100 Generations a thousand Generations
as long as it's significantly higher
than where you started in the initial
random population in generation
zero there are no recommendations in
this class about how big your population
should be how many generations you need
to run it for it's up to you it depends
on what you're evolving and what you're
evolving it
on other
questions okay there were a couple good
questions about the format of the oral
presentation how to do this well again
I'm I'm just going to repeat what I just
said uh I think most of you have
probably never given this short an oral
presentation before 2 minutes and 30
seconds is a surprisingly difficult
thing to do as the document as the
instructions for the final project say
there's a lot you need to communicate to
us all in two minutes and 30 seconds my
advice is write out verbatim exactly
what you plan to say it'll probably be
if you read what you just wrote in your
draft it's going to be more than 2
minutes and 30 seconds I'm going to
guess go through your uh text everywhere
you can replace two words with one do so
then go back do it again do it again
tighten your oral delivery of what
you're going to say until you get it
under two minutes and 30 seconds and
then practice practice practice practice
someone was asking about whether there's
going to be a timer in this class there
is not we're going to run a YouTube
video so the only thing we'll see is
your video and I'm I apologize there's
no clock in this room i' bring one but
in my my personal experience trying to
watch a clock and mentally estimate
where you are in your presentation and
speed up and slow down you don't have
time to do any of that conscious
processing in two minutes and 30 seconds
the only thing you have time to do is me
memorize what you're going to say and
practice it so that it's two minutes and
30 seconds so you don't have to
consciously think about timing and
presentation while you're speaking you
will not have time
okay that being said as you make your
oral presentation if you want to put a
few visual cues in there to remind you
of exactly where you are and what you
need to say that's fine too but again
please try and resist putting a whole
bunch of bullet points and then reading
off those bullet points for us as you go
yeah okay another good suggestion was
how to make uh how to make this 2
minutes and 30 second presentation I
suggested uh OBS it's a good way to
record a bunch of videos you can get the
timing down to 2 minutes and 30 seconds
you can make a slide deck and embed
videos in the slides and then Advance
those slides as you're
speaking and screen record that with no
audio and then you know that the
advancing of the slides matches what you
want to say verbally yeah just a couple
of strategies suggestions anything else
about how to prepare this oral
presentation
no okay all right so we are finally at
the final lecture for this course we are
continuing on our theme of evolving
bodies and brains we started in the mid
90s looking at Carl Sims evolving bodies
and brains of rigid robots we moved
forward into uh the last four or five
years where professor chinii and some
others have started to evolve bodies and
brains for soft robots we looked at how
to evolve bodies and brains of soft
robots we looked at the why of soft
robots why you might want to evolve and
deploy autonomous machines that are made
up of soft and rigid
components today we're going to look at
evolving biological robots which have
now become known in the popular uh press
as xenobots some of you have probably
heard of xenobots before so I've sort of
given away the punch line already but
going back to sort of the overarching
goal of evolutionary Robotics and
Robotics in general we would like to
deploy autonomous and safe machines out
there in the world to work and play
alongside us to do the many many things
that humans would prefer not to do so we
want to create autonomous capable and
safe machines what properties would we
like those machines to have other than
being autonomous capable and safe
cheap okay great what else robust robust
excellent
okay uh disposable disposable
great we've been deploying machines out
there in the world for about 300 years
and we're starting to reap the negative
benefits of doing that right it would be
better if we could figure out a
different way if we do want to deploy
large numbers of machines out there in
the world maybe we can do it in a better
way than we've been doing over the last
300 years other features you would like
of future autonomous
machines scalable what do you mean by
scalable with manufacturing you're able
to make one consistently or you're able
to scale the size scale down the size
different situations okay okay SC so
scale scale up literally the size larger
smaller we might want to scale the rate
at which we manufacture things to bring
down the
cost okay that's fine uh
manufacturable what
else how could you make autonomous safe
capable machines that are cheap robust
disposable scalable manufacturable and
still are not in retrospect going to be
something you don't necessarily want to
put out
there fail safe what do you mean by fail
safe
that likely Lo of failure will not be
disasterous okay okay is that something
different from
robustness kind of so robustness in
engineering generally means a machine
can keep doing what it's doing in the
face of adversity wear and tear all the
rest resilience is a slightly different
idea and
the the evil starfish project that I
worked on years back we called it the
resilient machines project because
robustness is often not enough good news
for us we are robust but also resilient
you've got a current strategy for how to
get through your day and it works for
most days tougher days you kind of tough
it out you keep doing what you're going
to do but every once in a while you wake
up and you face a day for whatever you
usually do just is not going to work so
you come up with a plan B that doesn't
work a plan C you get creative about
making your way around truly unexpected
events so yes things that fail well fail
softly that are resilient with would be
a good idea okay is that good can we go
ahead and make machines that have all
these properties and we're
okay okay
good good point right so robustness
resilience and reliability they're
almost the same thing but slightly
different right hopefully with these
three Rs maybe we're capturing that sort
of thing where we can kind of trust
these machines to do the right thing
autonomously that in retrospect when we
see how they adapted to unforeseen
circumstances we kind of look back and
say yeah that was sort of the best thing
the machine could have done I would have
done something similar if I was in that
situation we good anything else we're
missing okay
um you mean the machine itself to
reproduce it okay we could add it let's
put it down to man manufacturable we can
crank out very large numbers of the same
kind of
thing let's some anything
else intelligent okay yes all
right the original threes de were uh
autonomous safe and capable capable
intelligent again maybe the same thing
maybe slly
different you can tell I'm still fishing
right okay we have used state-of-the-art
or next Generation evolutionary
algorithms gradient descent we've
designed the heck out of this thing we
now have an autonomous capable safe
cheap robust disposable scalable
manufacturable resilient reliable and
intelligent
machine would you eat it would you
swallow it ahuh okay for better for
worse I some of you drinking out of
plastic uh cups this morning you're
ingesting some stuff right now that and
we're starting to learn is maybe not
great for us so although a little tongue
and cheek not
quite what are we
missing sorry edible edible
absolutely there is a branch of Robotics
called edible robotics
absolutely how about bio biocompatible
in
general maybe biocompatible fits into
well not quite
disposable how about
biodegradable how would you
want swap or something maybe you don't
want it to degrade can we let's say can
we gain rational control control over
how biodegradable it is depending on
where we're going to deploy it it should
degrade under these conditions not under
these we spent a lot of time in this
class uh occupying the past we've looked
at what's been done in robotics in the
'90s 220s we're now starting to think
about where we might want to go with
robotics in the years to come and I'm
obviously hope hopelessly biased but as
we're going to see in a moment my hope
is that Xeno Bots are the beginnings of
moving in this direction of a new way of
thinking about deploying machines
yes excellent okay so navigatable inside
the body so it's definitely got to be
bio I misspelled that
biocompatible you might have something
that's biocompatible and biodegradable
but you still don't want to put it
inside your body why not
but human body T to consider a lot of
things
that absolutely so what are we missing
now we're getting really specific you
actually are going to eat it or it's
going to be injected into you now you
really want a safe machine
uh could release radiation
okay okay okay biodegrade safely yes
okay well we haven't mentioned anything
about how we're going to make these
robots yet we're only trying to make a
wish list of what we would want for
future autonomous safe and capable
machines haven't said anything yet about
what we're going to make these robots
from what we want actually what we want
them to do the fitness function the
objective function the neural controller
haven't said anything about that yet
just what do we want and maybe what do
we not
want be Med functional okay to do what
we intend inside the body and able to
control it Behavior once it's beened
absolutely right so we want it to be
clinically functional we want it to do
whatever it is we're going to do you're
going to swallow a pill which isn't
really a pill it's a robot and it's a
brenberg vehicle it's going to be
vehicle what was it to be the lover it's
going to sense something inside the body
on its front left and front right and
it's going to swim upstream to follow
that signal that it that it senses
inside the body what might be a signal
you can imagine from a clinical point of
view you would want it to sense and
smell so there is a another branch of
Robotics called intelligent drug
delivery which is exactly that
intelligent drug delivery which is
exactly that idea you swallow something
but it is an active material it is going
to smell or sense the macro molecules
the proteins the stuff that is given off
by a cancerous tumor when we introduced
brenberg vehicles at the beginning of
the course I said imagine a rotten piece
of fruit in the back corner of the room
fruit flies will find it lots of
organisms are able to sense it takes
about two sensors two Motors and two
wires in two Dimensions to create a
machine that will move or swim upstream
following a source we could do that
here maybe this is our clinical Target
this is what we wanted to do find the
cancerous cell the drug go the uh the
robot goes to that cancerous tumor and
then extracts some very small blades and
starts spinning those blades to churn up
the cancerous tumor sounds like a
perfectly good solution to
Me Maybe not right we've been we've seen
some hilarious examples of perverse
instantiation in this class it suddenly
becomes much less funny when we're
thinking about clinical applications of
Robotics you definitely do not want an
autonomous machine operating inside your
body to fulfill whatever the fitness
function was in whatever way The
evolutionary algorithm found to do
so we haven't solved perverse
instantiation yet so this is still
probably sci-fi for the moment but maybe
not for much longer what else do we need
to add to this list to help repress the
probability of perverse
instantiation an off button an off
button okay yes well how would what
would we call
this like a um like something that can
set like all of the edge weights to zero
so that that's a way of instantiating
the big red button turning it
off
terminable the Terminator did something
for all of us roboticists right you got
to remember somewhere there's got to be
a big obvious red button when you're
watching cool robot videos on YouTube
watch the robots and usually you can see
somewhere on it there is a literal big
red button if the robot starts doing
something wrong it should be usually is
relatively easy for someone to step in
and
just turn it
off you swallow something not so obvious
how to make sure that it is easily
terminable something definitely we want
to have on this list not so obvious to
know how to do
it okay right we saw a few uh we saw a
few lectures about the evolution of
signaling and communication if we can't
literally touch the machine or directly
touch the machine how do we communicate
a termination signal great Point again
unsolved problem
termination whatever it is it should be
either a literal or figurative big red
button what does the big red button
mean stop right even a non-expert if
they're operating near the machine they
know nothing about robotics it should be
immediately obvious how to stop the
thing right pretty much everyone in the
western world that has any bit of
Education or uh knows when you see a big
red button and you press it usually the
thing will stop right but what does that
mean for some machines that are a
millimeter in diameter and they're
operating inside the body what would be
it's not going to be a literal big red
button not not so obvious not so
obvious okay let's come back to
something that I think Emily was
mentioning we want to put something
inside the human body and the human body
has been evolved for 3 point over 3.5
billion years to get rid of
intruders we are considering creating
Intruders what else do we need to add to
this
list what's
that oh adjustable adjustable you mean
we would adjust the
machine yeah okay possibly would that
help us make sure that the body doesn't
reject what we're trying to put into it
maybe it might help have to be a to
Rob what's the easiest way to convince
your body that what is inside it is
you make a robot out
of you okay so there is an immune
challenge as well for the clinical side
of this how are we going to make a
machine Let's assume this clinical
application that is capable autonomous
safe all these things biocompatible
biodegradable and your body does not
reject
it now we can start to think about how
are we actually going to evolve design
such a machine and what are we going to
make it from we are probably not going
to make it from all the things we've
seen in this course so far Metals
Plastics Ceramics batteries sensors
Motors the thing that the human body
pretty much every other organismal body
hates above all else is very small
amounts of metals Plastics and so
on uh this sounds interesting but how
are you going to get over all the
ethical concerns that people might raise
like all the regulations because a lot
of people might completely against
absolutely not only will they be against
it they are already against it so all of
this is science fiction
however some of it is becoming science
fact so let's go into the how we might
do this and then we'll come back to the
ethics how would we ever get over the
social and Regulatory hurdles that this
Vision want this one possible vision for
future autonomous machines presents to
the public
okay all right there's lots of different
ways to introduce the xenobots here's
one we've seen this machine already
we've seen a lot of rigid machines uh in
this uh in this class
already we want to make it we want to
make the machines resilient whatever it
is they're going to do when we deploy
them out there in the real world they
are going to be faced with surprise
they're going to be faced with unknown
unknowns things for which the
programmers or the roboticist did not
create contingency plans for so in the
case of traditional robots if something
truly unexpected happens they have one
and only one set of options to adapt to
that unknown
unknown which is to alter their neural
controller they can alter their behavior
how they move given whatever has
changed soft
robots soft robots have a different
option which is once they experience
something that is unexpected
they have two sets of options available
to them they can adapt their neural
controller to try and recover from
what's whatever has happened which in
this case is physical injury or they can
alter their physical structure to adapt
yeah they've got two options available
to them so we've looked at uh rigid
machines made of metals and Plastics
we've looked at soft robots last time
that are made from rubbers and silicones
soft compliable
materials what about a robot that's made
from biological components rather than
technological components this is
obviously not a robot or maybe it's
obvious you're looking at a very early
tadpole so a machine arguably that's
made from a very large number of
biological components which in this case
are genetically
unmodified
cells okay we're going to look at an
experiment from two of my biology
colleagues uh Doug Blackiston and
Michael Levan at toughs this has nothing
to do with xenobots nothing to do with
robotics we're going to now visit
biology for a moment and view biology
from the point of view of a
roboticist what would happen if we
started to try and build machines to
address all these desiderata but instead
of building building them from metals
and silicone we're going to think about
building them from cells why might we
want to do that because we might get a
lot of these things for free question
are biolog robots there are now and
we're going to see one today
yes okay so we're thinking about trying
to build robots from cells cells are an
interesting candidate for a building
block for autonomous machines are they a
good Choice bad choice let's see this
study I think is interesting in that it
suggests why you might want to build
robots from cells or that you might be
able to build robots from cells this is
a very early frog tadpole uh Doug
Blackiston has genetically modified the
DNA of this tadpole so that is
genetically blinded it grows from birth
Without Eyes ethics has already been
mentioned already a lot of ethical
components to what we're going to talk
about this morning genetically altered
tadpole to grow blind it has no eyes
where you would expect eyes to be but
Doug has uh ectopically
rearranged
ectopically ectopically rearranged some
cells in this tadpole so ectopic it
means take stuff from one place and of
an organism and put it some somewhere
else Doug took ey precursor cells this
is a type of stem cell which generally
speaking shows up in the tadpole here
and here and eventually become
functional eyes but these particular
stem cells have been ectopically placed
into the tail of the tadpole seems like
an odd thing to
do this ectopic surgical rearrangement
of tissue in this uh tadpole not only
did not kill the tadpole but as this
tadpole gradually developed into an
adult frog the eye precursor cells
started to mature and develop into an
actual eye which you can see starting to
appear here this eye started to send out
neural processes or synapses that were
looking for
something the nerve cord and the nerve
tissue in the tail also started to send
out
synapses and they they connected during
development and as the tail receded this
tadpole grew into a perfectly healthy
frog with an eye in its butt you got to
love science right okay Not only was
this a healthy frog that had no eyes on
its front and one on its back when Doug
would wave uh would wave something at
the back the Frog frog would react in
the way you would expect if it was a fly
the it was a picture of a fly the Frog
would start to turn around and face in
the direction of the fly if it was
something big and shaking like a
predator the Frog would tend to move
away a functioning eye in a place you
wouldn't
expect how is this possible why did this
happen plasticity plasticity plasticity
can you be a little bit more specific
what do you mean by plasticity so the
body is actively trying to make
something
functional unusual
circumstance absolutely so uh later
today I want you to saw your laptop in
half and then ectopically rearrange
it do the same thing with your car your
drone your cell phone any machine on
this planet does not seem to have this
capability so this is just a very
dramatic example but if you think about
it of course there's examples all over
the place that cells are a pretty
interesting candidate for building stuff
from because under many circumstances
these cells seem happy to be or happy in
quotation marks to be rearranged which
is kind of interesting so about five
years ago uh uh Doug and Mike and myself
received some joint funding to take this
idea and say well if you can rearrange
genetically uh if you can rearrange frog
tissue manually so Doug came up with the
idea to take stuff from here and put it
here could we instead task an AI with
coming up with ways to ectopically
rearrange frog tissue to come up with
something that is different from a
normal
frog okay that's where the idea for the
xenobots started
okay all right so let's talk about the
how now a lot of these pieces are going
to look actually quite familiar to you
five years ago when we started uh Doug
Blackiston told us he was able to
liberate two types of cells from very
early frog embryo so not actually a
tadpole but something that's a little
further along from an egg very very
early frog embryo he could extract from
those eggs
a whole bunch of frog skin cells like
your skin cells those individual cells
or small patches of frog's skin are
passive and soft you can pull and push
on them and they deform in response to
those
horses Doug told us that he could also
pull out of that very early frog embryo
a second cell type which are uh heart
muscle
cells these are small cells
that when put together those cells will
tend to increase and decrease in volume
starting to sound
familiar so we decided let's see if we
can get an evolutionary algorithm to
figure out how to put these two types of
cells together to produce something a
machine that is made up of just frog
skin cells and just frog heart muscle
cells and we're going to try and get the
evolutionary algorithm to figure out how
to put these two building blocks
together to do something what do you
think we wanted that thing to do what
have we seen a thousand times in this
class
already
Locomotion our old trick right let's try
and get something that just walks along
the bottom of a petri dish filled with
room temperature fresh water which is
where frogs are happiest you got a
little a little dish filled with room
temperature fresh water and we're going
to put something inside it that's going
to settle to the bottom of the dish and
then walk along the bottom of the of the
dish so this is like us trying to sink
to the bottom of a swimming pool and
then walk along the bottom of the
swimming pool that's what we wanted to
do yep so same Fitness function we've
seen before we're going to apply this
Fitness function to an evolutionary
algorithm which in turn is wrapped
around a physics engine coming back to
aby's question we're going to see that
this is a an adapted physics engine for
for this
purpose okay what is the evolutionary
algorithm we borrowed Nick's uh
evolutionary algorithm which is evolving
populations of networks evolving
populations of cppns which stands for
compositional pattern producing
networks in this case uh everything is
more or less the same but instead of the
cppn placing voxal of four different
colors inside an empty Cube the cppn is
going to be restricted to only be
capable of placing voxal of two
different colors inside this empty Cube
light blue and these are red green voxal
we're going to use red green to so that
we can see them these voxal increasing
and decreasing in volume so far so good
questions okay so just a recap our
evolutionary algorithm is going to
search over the space of all all
possible ways of placing frog skin cells
and frog heart muscle cells to produce
something that moves as quickly as
possible in about 10 seconds in our frog
tissue physics
engine yes um did you find like when you
were designing this experiment that like
having soft tissue cells was like
beneficial to like um like increasing
movement because I know that like um you
were talking about with like Nick
Cheney's study how like they like a lot
of the different models like evolved out
of using soft tissue or like hard bone
instead of just using muscle great point
so good idea is what's going to happen
when we run this evolutionary algorithm
is it going to discard or make as The
evolutionary algorithm going to make
less and less use of passive soft tissue
which is frog skin cells and make a big
ball of frog heart muscle tissue are
we're going to get the same result as
Nick saw with his soft and hard
simulated voxal or we going to get
something
different we're going to see who knows
right okay so we don't know yet what
we're going to get but let's pull back
again and remember sort of what the big
picture of what we're doing we're taking
uh although the although these were
genetically modified frog cells to
genetically blind the frog in this case
in this case the Frog cells are
genetically unmodified these are just
100% natural frog skin cells and frog
heart muscle
cells how many of these do we already
get for
free no matter what the evolutionary
algorithm comes up with a big ball of
muscle something that's 99% skin and 1%
muscle we already get uh we already get
this we get this we get this there's one
thing we were missing from this
list carbon
neutral these frog cells as they're
growing in the egg they're absorbing
carbon when these cells eventually die
and degrade back into the environment
they break down into things that are
mostly carbon they put the carbon back
out into the environment so if we
discount all the compute that we're
going to use to design these xenobots
and how we manufacture them the xenobots
themselves by definition are going to be
carbon
neutral so far so good okay so depending
on our yard stick we're already kind of
ahead of the game no matter what the
evolutionary algorithm comes up
with
okay all right let's have a look at the
evolutionary algorithm
itself nothing too surprising here we're
starting with a population of random
cppns I think uh Sam krigman who was my
PhD student at the time who set up this
physics engine and this evolutionary
algorithm used a population size of 100
so at the beginning we have 100 random
cppns you're looking at what the first
three random cppn in that population of
100 Produce we've seen cppn a few times
in this class now it's not surprising
this is what they tend to do so here's
one cppn painting mostly frog skin into
this hollow cage and a little bit of
heart muscle tissue this one is
producing a big ball of muscle this
third cppn is painting about half skin
half heart muscle tissue okay there was
a question about the physics engine you
can see immediately or I hope you can
see imediately that this physics engine
is 99% Vox CAD it's what we talked about
last time voxels where neighboring
voxels are connected by a flexible beam
and that beam resists pushing and
pulling and twisting and yawing and
rolling pretty much what we saw last
time with a few additional details put
on top and these are biophysical details
things that Doug knows about frog cells
and these were things that Doug told Sam
who was building the physics engine some
additional details about how frog skin
and how frog heart muscle cells behave
the
biophysics of these two cell
types you can see that this video looks
a lot like the videos we saw last time
with the soft robots but there's a few
details that already should look
different to you which are hints about
the biophysical the added biophysical
details that Sam added in what do you
think they might be
um are the are the cells able to act
like extremely independently like they
look like they're acting pretty
independently right yeah how what is it
what is the visual cue here that they're
acting independently independent how
like with the different squares
activating like very separate to their
neighbors like there's it seems almost
like there's sort of some pattern but
that may have been like an evolved
pattern like over time but like the
individual like cells look like they can
sort of act on their own absolutely
they're acting on their own which cells
are acting on their own the heart cell
the heart cells are acting on their
own
Contra they're expanding and Contracting
independently it's a little difficult to
see but the heart muscle cells when
they're green they're getting bigger and
when they're red they're getting smaller
so they're getting bigger and smaller in
volume and they're doing so
independently can we be a little bit
more specific independent
how what is changing within these cells
or Within These voxels that's
independent from their
neighbors seems like
of the phase is different right remember
when we talked about Agonist and
antagonistic muscle groups when one is
increasing one is
decreasing that's a phase offset right
that one's getting bigger one's getting
smaller one's getting smaller one's
getting bigger things that are in Phase
get bigger together smaller together
here you see random phase offsets it's
not that there's one group that's always
getting bigger when another group is
always getting smaller which is we what
we saw last time in Nick's Soft Robotics
experiment each of the heart muscle
cells in each of the three robots here
has its own random phase offset Sam
deliberately put that into or added that
to Vox CAD to match a particular
biophysical detail that Doug
communicated to us so Sam and I were
trying to learn the physiology of frogs
at the beginning of this project and so
when Doug told us that he could work
with heart muscle tissue we knew enough
to know that heart muscle cells
generally speaking when they're put
together they synchronize their actions
so in you in your heart all of the heart
cells and I wish this for you for the
rest of your life that they stay
synchronized all the cells decrease in
volume at the same time they all
increase in volume at the same time and
when they're placed together in a shell
in the shape of your heart all those
Contracting cells cause your entire
heart to contract which pumps the blood
out and when all the cells expand your
cell your your heart incre your entire
heart increases in volume which pulls
blood into the heart that's what makes a
heart a heart you want these cells to
synchronize same thing in a Frog as a
frog embryo grows into an adult frog
these heart uh muscle cells go to where
they need to go they connect to their
neighbors and they communicate somehow
remember our discussions about
communication they need to communicate
and they all decrease together
communicate and increase together as we
were starting to put this experiment
together it dawned on us that of course
the cppn is going to paint or put frog
heart muscle cells in patterns and into
into 3D shapes or
distributions that don't exist in the
natural frog so we asked Doug the
obvious question what's going to happen
if you rearrange heart muscle cells will
they still synchronize or not and Doug
said
I don't know no one's ever done this
before so what should we do what should
we have done at that point when one of
the biophysical details is uncertainty
for any one of these ways of arranging
frog heart muscle cells the biologists
can't tell us whether or not they're
going to synchronize so what do we tell
the physics
engine like you want to reward it to
synchronize but I'm guessing you don't
just want it to like only be told to
synchronize so that it just like
synchronizes no matter how that like uh
messes with the other functionality of
it a good thought we could try and build
synchronization into the fitness
function but the physics engine The
evolutionary algorithm doesn't know what
pattern will produce synchronization
except for one pattern which is an adult
frog cell adult frog heart so we can't
we could put in the fitness function but
it's just it's meaningless to The
evolutionary algorithm what you want to
avoid is the evolutionary algorithm
exploiting something in your simulator
that doesn't match reality absolutely if
you don't know what's going to happen in
reality you should leave it out random
absolutely so remember our discussions
about the Sim tooreal Gap there's a big
Sim tooreal Gap here we're going to try
and make robots out of frog heart muscle
cells there is much that is unknown
about those cell types especially when
they're rearranged
so the lessons from the simal literature
that we looked at says when in doubt
leave it out or make it random or make
it as hard on the evolutionary algorithm
as possible so that it can't exploit
things that aren't going to exist in
reality we do not want this evolutionary
algorithm coming up with an idea in
which it thinks the cells are going to
synchronize but they won't in reality so
Sam deliberately made things hard on the
evolutionary algorithm by randomizing
the phase offsets of every frog heart
muscle cell that that was simulated we
assumed the worse assume that these
cells no matter how they're arranged
will never
synchronize so we've given the
evolutionary algorithm a pretty hard job
it's got to build a reliable machine
something that reliably moves from left
to right along the bottom of the petri
dish but it's going to build that
machine out of unreliable Parts partly
unreliable unreliable in that they're
not necessarily going to work
together great question are we taking
into account the viscosity of the water
look at these videos what do you think
there's a pretty strong hint
here it's a little hard to see but these
things are settling slowly on to the
featureless white plane so yes we
reduced gravity viscosity is a little
bit higher there's some additional
details beyond the biophysics the
physics of walking along the bottom of a
pool of a swimming pool yeah so there's
a bunch of other subtle physical details
that we put on top of Vox CAD but
actually not that many it's most mostly
Vox CAD that we're looking at here are
the like levels of like these blue boxes
is sort of indicating like um where the
water level might be like in the
physical world or like oh no that that's
just the graphics left over from Vox cat
that's the blue sky at the limit of the
featureless white plane completely
irrelevant but good observation do you
have to feed the cell continu oh great
question do you have to feed these cells
okay hold on to that question we'll come
back to that where's the where's the
battery coming from where's the power
coming from to drive all this we we'll
come back to that in a moment in a few
minutes okay so here we go so just again
to think about this design problem one
way to think about this or ground your
intuition is imagine you were tasked
with building a boat just a boat that's
going to float down the river you're
going to get to place human rowers in
the boat you can have as many rowers in
the boat as you want you can design the
3D geometry of the boat in any way you
want the the trick is that when you put
these human rowers in the boat they're
just going to do their own thing they
are not going to synchronize and you
want the boat to go straight a very
difficult non-intuitive design problem
which is exactly the kinds of problems
that evolutionary algorithms tend to be
good at solving so far so good okay all
right here we go so uh you just saw the
first three cppn from the initial
population of 100 cppn we're evolving
these things to walk along the bottom of
the petri dish you can see that none of
these three are moving from left to
right if you squint really really really
hard you'll notice that this one
actually moves about 1 millimeter to the
right this one is actually doing a
little bit better than this one and this
one so in the Next Generation The
evolutionary algorithm is going to
delete the cppn that produce this delete
the cppn that produce this and make
random modified copies of the cppn that
produced this I'm not even going to show
you the video you know what's going to
happen you're going to start to evolve
things that move further and further to
the right like for example this thing in
the upper left I don't know if turning
off the lights will help a little maybe
a little
bit the little Rainbow squiggle
underneath shows you how this thing
moved blue is where it started and then
this red thing moved moved moved to the
right and ended up
here they're all
red what does that mean h sorry this one
is the end of one evolutionary algorithm
Sam then rewound The evolutionary tape
created a different population of 100
random cppns ran it for another couple
hundred generations and at the end got
this most fit robot ran the evolutionary
the third time fourth time 100th time so
you're looking at the best robots from
100 evolutionary runs what
happened they didn't synchronize so it's
a little it's a little confusing because
they're all shown in red you see red
what do you not
see there's no it's all like muscle it's
all muscle right evolutionary Alam said
no problem create a ball of
muscle we took this to Doug Doug said I
can't build it I'm sorry there's no way
I when I'm going to try and actually
ectopically rearrange these tissues for
various reasons we won't go into this
morning can't do it I can't make a ball
of muscle so we already failed to cross
the Sim to real Gap we had
manufacturable on the board here
somewhere Doug can't manufacture it
can't even make it let alone see whether
it matches simulation so Sam went back
and added a term to the fitness function
that constrained things so that the
evolutionary algorithm had to include
frog skin cells and this is what we
got all of these things in the simulator
you just saw they all move from left to
right we sent Doug all 100 MP4s we sent
him all 100 videos he went through all
100 said I can't build that can't build
that can't build that can't build that
turns out that five of these 100 Doug
said I think I can actually build these
okay we're close now at least we can try
to cross the simeral Gap so far so good
okay so let's uh let's watch Doug try
and build this one down
here okay here we go might be a little
difficult to see we've got some muscle
on the bottom and we have some soft skin
on the
top okay here's that robot in action
there was a question before about
whether the soft passive skin is useful
the answer is
yes how is it
useful it's helping this thing move from
left to
right is it like a weight it's a bit of
yeah I guess actually maybe yes maybe
maybe the just this passive weight on
the top helps keeping it on the
ground how else does it help we can see
the heart muscle cells on the vental or
the bottom part of the this thing
whatever this thing
is and skin on the upper part the dorsal
part how is the skin
helping it gives the SE the H the heart
cell something to hold on to you'll
notice that the heart cells are doing
their thing they're getting bigger and
smaller they're pushing down and back
back on the floor which is good right
that's causing a little bit of forward
Force but these are all random forces
these forces are pushing down into the
floor but these forces are also pushing
up and into the soft tissue on the
top that soft tissue is absorbing all of
those forces coming up from below and
it's kind of averaging them out and
supplying those forces back down so this
is a little hand wavy but somehow the
Frog S soft Miss muscle tissue is
averaging the random forces from the
motors from the heart muscle tissue it's
helping another example of sort of
embodied cognition here the body is
helping with what we want this thing to
do so far so good okay so Doug saw this
video and said I can build it here we go
um okay here we
go you're looking at a bunch of frog
eggs here uh Doug is injecting uh a
little bit of a chemical that's going to
determine cell type it's going to make
it easier for him to see inside these
eggs where the skin cells are and where
the heart muscle cells are
this is him pulling off the vitaline
membrane so some of the stuff he doesn't
want so I'm going to skip quickly over a
bunch of these videos this is Doug
starting trying to get at the two Lego
bricks the two types of building blocks
that he's going to use to do this we're
looking down through the microscope with
Doug the uh um the magnification here is
such that these things that you're
looking at are about 2 millimeters in
diameter so these things would be just
visible to the naked eye these tiny
pliers and calipers are about 1 mm
across uh if you ever meet Doug do not
give him any coffee or Coca-Cola no
caffeine it's got very very steady hands
this is not an easy thing to
do
okay uh as the title implies here he's
removing the animal caps there's a lot
of biology terminology today you don't
need to remember all this terminology
he's removing about the top tenth of
each of the cells which is where the two
types of SK uh cell types are that he
wants the skin cells and the heart
muscle cells this is where they tend to
be uh crowded at this particular part in
frog development Tim still trying to get
at the two building block types of
building blocks he
needs here's two uh you're going to see
two animal caps in a moment hopefully oh
sorry 1 2 3 four five six animal caps so
he's pulled off the tops of six eggs and
that white stuff you see those are
individual frog
cells gives you a better sense of the
scale of magnification that we're
looking at
here he's getting rid of the animal caps
themselves here and
leaving uh the actual stuff he wants the
frog skin cells and frog heart muscle
cells
he's now pulled all of these into a very
very small syringe and he's now going to
inject these cells back into a different
Petri B dish where he's going to
actually start building this xenobot
here the this dark circle that you just
saw this is a small concave well in the
bottom of the petri dish so all of these
cells are settling into this dish I'm
going to skip over this
one this video is sped up quite a bit
you'll you can clearly see the
individual frog cells here cells quote
unquote don't like to be alone there's a
little bit of random motion but they're
also seeming to be autonomously clumping
together imagine trying to build robots
or machines out of Parts where the
individual parts are like helping with
the construction they want to work with
you rather than against you this is
preliminary Visual Evidence already that
we're in very different territory here
we're building from components that sort
of want to help with what we're doing
again scare quotes around all of that
okay this is pulled back a little bit
this is about 2,000 cells again sped up
you can see the cells don't like to be
alone they're pulling back
together this is later in the process
so cells at this stage in development
are quite sticky imagine taking a whole
bunch of masking tape and rolling it up
into balls so you've got a whole bunch
of balls of masking tape and then
throwing them into a big concave dish
and shaking that dish a little bit
they're all going to glom together into
a big ball of sticky uh
spheres this is sort of the raw material
the block of marble into which Doug is
now starting to carve away or remove The
Unwanted material you can see this very
small uh forceps on the left and this is
a micro cauterization device on the
right which is a fancy way of saying
it's a very very small uh Car cigarette
lighter it's a very small hot wire that
burns away this unwanted material you
should be able to see a little cross
pattern here this is Doug making the
four little stubby legs in the bottom of
this thing he's eventually going to take
this thing and turn it right side up and
put it on the
ground I'm showing you a few snapshots
from the the manufacturing process here
we're skipping over a lot of other
parts remember that Doug is trying to
build this from skin and heart muscle
tissue and there is a particular
distribution of heart and and skin we've
got heart muscle tissue on the bottom
half and and skin tissue on the upper
half so when Doug was dropping these
cells into this concave dish he
sprinkled down a a little thin mat of
heart muscle cells another layer of
heart heart heart skin heart skin heart
it's like him making a big hero sandwich
you can layer these two different cell
types and then scrape away The Unwanted
material that as of three years ago or
four years ago was the best way Doug had
to try and build what the evolutionary
algorithm came up with so far so
good
okay okay here's him putting the
finishing touches on things he's
scraping things
away scraping away a little bit of The
Unwanted material this xenobot now is
about a millimeter across imagine
looking through the microscope at a
poppy seed and with your own hands
holding very very small tools you were
trying to scrape this pattern into a
poppy seed not an easy thing to
do okay Doug Sam Mike and I took a very
deep Collective breath Doug took the
xenobot turned it right side up put it
on the bottom of the petri dish and
turned on the
camera and this is what we got
the physical xenobot doesn't quite look
like the simulated xenobot it doesn't
quite move like the simulated xenobot
but it was close enough to walk along
the bottom of the petri dish from left
to right you probably know by now there
are many other xenobots that did not
cross the Sim to real Gap but as Doug
got better at building these things and
Sam improved The evolutionary algorithm
to evolve these things things we started
to produce more and more of them that
could cross the Sim toore
Gap but maybe Doug cheated and put the
petri dish on a table that was tilted to
the right maybe this thing is actually
just walking downhill or sliding
downhill how do we know that it's
actually the xenobot that's moving from
left to right and not some feature of
the environment we were talking about
control
experiments uh at the beginning of this
morning's lecture we spent quite
actually one of the hardest parts of
this experiment was thinking about
what's a fair control how do we prove
that this xenobot is actually walking
from left to right because of the heart
muscle tissue on the vental surface and
skin on the dorsal
surface we eventually came up with the
idea take the xenobot and place it on
its back if we place it on its back and
it's still Walks from left to right then
it's not the xenobot that's doing the
walking it's something else else in its
environment that's producing left to
right travel maybe the table table is
tilted or maybe there's a very slight
current inside the room temperature
fresh water that's pushing the thing to
the right remember it's a poppy seed
lightly floating on the bottom of a
petri
dish okay so here we go you're going to
see this is the physical xenobot right
side up
and in a moment when the video switches
you're going to see Doug has reached in
and flipped the xenobot on its
back okay there it is sorry on uh up
right side
up and in a
moment you're going to see it placed on
its back exactly the same xenobot in top
and bottom it no longer moves from left
to right so we can conclude from this
that the the reason this xenobot is
moving from left to right is because of
its 3D geometry and tissue
distribution questions comments yes did
you know
what yep yep yep good
question this act from our perspective
left to right but really move in this
direction relative to the Xeno
remember dietic sensing relative to whom
to the xenobot that's how as long as it
moved this way was fine if we took this
thing and rotated at 18 180 degrees you
would expect it to move in that
direction uh if you were to take this a
bit further because right now you're
embedding the controller with like the
cells also muscles for example okay like
but bodies don't like that you have
brain cells some bodies have brain cells
we need to resist neuro chauvinism in
this class right yes some do but if you
were to create something that that's
more complex that then how would you go
about that would you have to also if you
wanted to create something with brain
let's say great question yes okay so
hold on to that for a moment I see we
have two minutes left so let me spend
one minute concluding the class and then
one minute where is this all going we
have reached the end of evolutionary
robotics I have very much enjoyed my
time with you I hope you have enjoyed
the class obviously this isn't the end
we will see each other again on Friday
but I just wanted to take a moment to
say I very much enjoyed my time here I
hope you've enjoyed the class as well do
remember to get everything in on time by
uh Monday night so that Fria can get
everything ready for us Tuesday morning
for those of you that are graduating I
wish you all the best in whatever you do
next for those of you that are coming
back Next Year look forward to seeing
you all again okay that gives us 60
seconds to talk about where is this all
going my short answer is who knows for
me at least it's can we make autonomous
and capable and safe machines that also
do all of these the answer may be yes
the answer may be no you asked
specifically about could we create
xenobots in which there are is neural
tissue
inside I will tell you that we have a
very long list of to-do items things we
want to do making neur robots is near
the top of this
list I'm recording this lecture so I
can't actually talk about things that
we've already seen in the lab that we
haven't published
yet you can guess what some of these
things are everything you we've seen
this morning is making things out of
frog skin cell out of frog cells you can
imagine one of our uh big burning
questions immediate imately after we saw
this was possible is can you make things
out of can you make biobots out of
different cell types taken from
different organisms what other organism
do you think was at the top of our list
about two years
ago exactly you can go Google anthr
robots anthr robots anthro for human
anthr robots uh members of the Levan lab
published a paper about anthr robots
earlier this year or later late last
year so anthr robots are now a thing and
we would break tons of regulations but
in theory we can make an anthr robot
from you give it back to you and you
could swallow it and experience no ill
effects okay maybe a good place to end
today thank you all good luck with the
final preparations on your final project
see you here 7:30 in the morning on
Tuesday you have a quiz due tonight